---
title: "Introducing the app design"
description: "It's time to reveal the boilerplate app design 🎨🧑‍🎨📱"
image:
  src: /designs/App-Design-OG.png


authors:
  - name: Yaz Jallad
    avatar:
      src: https://github.com/ninjaparade.png
      target: _blank
    to: https://twitter.com/ninjaparade
date: 2024-02-17
badge:
  label: Boilerplate Application
---

## Time to reveal the design

We're excited to unveil the first section of our mobile application: the user login flow. This critical component is the gateway to our app, where users obtain the API token required to act on their behalf. Despite the debate around One-Time Passwords (OTPs) and user experience, we've refined this feature to ensure a seamless process for our users.

::blog-image
---
images: [ '/designs/enter-email.png', '/designs/verification-email.png', '/designs/enter-code.png', '/designs/verify-code.png',]
---
::

## Y no passwords?

For us, the answer is simple: eliminating passwords reduces complexity. If you've ever used a Laravel starting boilerplate, you're familiar with the standard flow: registration, login, verify password (optional), request password reset, and confirm password reset. While this isn't a significant amount of code to maintain in production, the reliance on passwords introduces additional considerations, especially during migrations.

## A Real-Life Example

A previous client faced a challenge migrating thousands of customers from a service with an unknown encryption method for passwords. Our solution? Forget the passwords. We enabled users to request a one-time passcode sent to their registered email, bypassing the need for password migration altogether.

## The Advantages Keep Adding Up

In traditional flows, both user registration and login benefit from email verification, typically done by sending a unique link via email. However, our approach streamlines this process. When a user registers, they receive an OTP code to log in, simultaneously verifying their email and authenticating their identity. This method eliminates the need for password reset flows and verifies user emails in one fell swoop.

**Note** the email link shown above in the email will be handled by the app (deep linking) and the OTP code will be filled in automatically and submitted for the user. The user will not be required to copy/paste the code.

## The Profile Screen

After verification, the app grants the user a personal access token with defined API scopes. The profile screen allows users to manage push notifications, access app-level settings, and manage their account. We also provide templates for common screens like FAQs and Terms & Conditions, presented as web views or server-rendered screens via the API for easy implementation.

::blog-image
---
images: [ '/designs/profile.png']
---
::


## Conclusion

I hope you can see the benefits of this product so far? We are excited about providing this battle tested and seamless authentication flow 
to app developers to kickstart their next project. 

## Got Thoughts? Questions?

We're all ears and would love to hear from you. Feel free to reach out on Twitter or X.

[Yaz Jallad @ninjaparade](https://twitter.com/ninjaparade)

[Mirza Učanbarlić @supersonicbyte](https://twitter.com/supersonicbyte)

[Ahmet Faruk Çuha @faruk__cuha](https://twitter.com/faruk__cuha) 

## PS

Once the app design is complete, Yes there will be more screens provided, we will also be sharing the figma file prepared and designed by our very own [Egzon Gollopeni @egzidev](https://twitter.com/egzidev).

