---
title: 'State of Navigation in iOS'
description: Navigation has always been a crucial component of iOS apps. The ability to smoothly transition from screen to screen with seamless animations is a hallmark of the iOS ecosystem. 
image:
  src: /blog/state-of-navigation-in-ios/OG.png
authors:
  - name: Mirza Učanbarlić
    avatar:
      src: /images/profile/Mirza.jpeg
      target: _blank
    to: https://twitter.com/supersonicbyte
date: 2024-03-13T00:00:00.000Z
badge:
  label: iOS
---

# State of Navigation in iOS

Navigation has always been a crucial component of iOS apps. The ability to smoothly transition from screen to screen with seamless animations is a hallmark of the iOS ecosystem. Users expect deep linking to content inside an app when they open a link for an installed app. However, managing navigation within an app is not trivial, especially now with more than one option available.

## SwiftUI & Navigation

SwiftUI's navigation system wasn't fully complete until the release of `iOS 16` and `NavigationStack`. NavigationStack is a significant improvement, offering a programmatic way of navigating. Let's briefly explore navigation with NavigationStack.

```swift
// CODE HERE
```

In the example above, we use a separate module named `Router` that holds a `NavigationPath`. NavigationPath is a type-erased list, meaning different types can be pushed to the list as long as they conform to the specified protocol in the NavigationPath struct (currently, that's the Hashable protocol). Inside the Router type, we can define methods that manipulate the path according to state changes programmatically. Furthermore, we pass a binding from the Router's path variable to the NavigationStack view, binding our model to the NavigationStack view. To define what views should be shown when a certain value is pushed to the path, we use the `navigationDestination` view modifier. I also used the new Observable API introduced in iOS 17 for this example.

### What about presentation?

For screen presentation, we typically use the `sheet` or `fullScreenCover` view modifier. We pass a binding to a boolean value indicating whether the view should be presented and the actual view to present. We can also use various view modifiers that alter the properties of the presented view. For example, the `presentationDetents([.medium])` view modifier specifies that the view's height should be half the screen size when presented as a sheet.

### How would I Deep Link?

With a setup like this, deep linking is a matter of manipulating the navigation path. We could easily implement a method in the Router so that, according to a parsed deep link, we append the correct value to the path and rely on NavigationStack to reflect that value accordingly.

### Drawbacks

While NavigationStack is a significant improvement from the previous NavigationView in SwiftUI, it doesn't solve all navigation problems and requirements. Firstly, it's only available for iOS 16+ and many developers still need to support iOS 15. Even though we have a nice API for simple presentation, we lack the full flexibility to make view transitions like in the Netflix app. Additionally, there have been reported crashes when working with NavigationStack and the new Observable framework introduced in iOS 17 (https://gist.github.com/mbrandonw/572b526b6a94cc778cfe71bed3b69080#file-fb1296930). These issues will likely be fixed soon, but it's important to note that this API is still young and not entirely stable.

## What's the alternative?

The alternative is the reliable UIKit. UIKit provides powerful and flexible navigation APIs available since iOS 1.0. The question is, how can we leverage the old navigation methods while still enjoying the benefits of SwiftUI? Let's explore how one could do exactly that.

```swift
// CODE HERE
```

In the example above, we mimic the same architecture used in the SwiftUI examples. We use a Router module that exposes a similar interface to the one used with SwiftUI navigation, but it operates on a `navigationController` and wraps the SwiftUI view into a `UIHostingController`. Depending on the architecture we use, we can inject the router into the view or inside the view model if we use an architecture that utilizes view models. Also, the project is configured to check the UIKit lifecycle, which provides a starter project with storyboards. Since we want programmatic control, we'll configure the project not to use storyboards and start our Router inside `SceneDelegate`.

### Deep Linking

Deep linking is pretty much the same as in the SwiftUI example; it's a matter of manipulating the view controllers on the stack, so I won't go into details.

### Custom Presentation & Transitions

UIKit navigation still outperforms SwiftUI in terms of custom transitions and presentations, like those seen in the Netflix app. Let's quickly explore how we can craft a custom presentation with this navigation approach.

```swift
// Writing the custom presentation controller & custom presentation transition delegate.
```

The presentation controller allows us to manipulate how the view controller will be presented. In our case, we set the initial frame of our view to be centered with a height and width of 50. We then initiate an animation where the view will be animated to the container view size, letting UIKit handle the animation. We make a UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate subclass that will return our newly created presentation controller. We create an instance of this delegate in our Router class and implement a function `customPresent## Got Thoughts? Questions?

## Got Thoughts? Questions?

We're all ears and would love to hear from you. Feel free to reach out on Twitter or X.

[Yaz Jallad @ninjaparade](https://twitter.com/ninjaparade)

[Mirza Učanbarlić @supersonicbyte](https://twitter.com/supersonicbyte)

[Ahmet Faruk Çuha @faruk\_\_cuha](https://twitter.com/faruk__cuha)
