---
title: "Beyond the Literal Sprint: Paths to Success"
description: 
image:
  src: /blog/beyond-the-literal-sprint-paths-to-success/OG.png
authors:
  - name: Yaz Jallad
    avatar:
      src: https://github.com/ninjaparade.png
      target: _blank
    to: https://twitter.com/ninjaparade
date: 2024-05-01
badge:
  label: Deep Thoughts
---

# Beyond the Literal Sprint: Paths to Success
What I'm about to share is based on real-life experiences from my time at various companies, not from books or academic studies.

In the tech industry, or any field involving software, products, or event coordination, there's often a rush to accomplish a significant amount of work in a limited time. There are numerous strategies to manage this effectively and avoid burnout. You're probably familiar with terms like "Sprint" or "Cycle," and might have come across the book "Shape Up." Essentially, these methods involve dividing work, planning it in advance, and committing to complete it within a specified period, all while managing the unpredictable variables that inevitably arise in team settings.

# The dreaded "Sprint"
I was part of an early-stage startup where the prevailing mindset was "release mode." Even after nearly four years, this approach hadn't changed. We did not have a clear "stopping point", our product was never "finished", but our objective was to deliver quality work consistently and predictably.

# Dividing up the work
Tasks were defined by product owners, project managers, and stakeholders. These tasks were prioritized, documented, and clarified. What often lagged was the technical planning. Although our team was technically adept, they weren’t developers and sometimes underestimated the complexities of the systems we built. A task that seemed simple could actually take days to complete. Despite these challenges, it was crucial that everyone communicated effectively to ensure a clear path forward.

# Let's get ready to sprint.
Every one or two weeks, we'd initiate a new sprint, containing tasks that the development team committed to, managed by the project manager, and prioritized by the product owners and stakeholders. 
Once a sprint started, we **avoided adding new tasks to the sprint**.

Why? Consider this scenario: I tell you to sprint as fast as you can, but while you're doing that, I keep moving the finish line further and further away. What would you do? Slow down? Stop sprinting entirely? It's a natural human reaction.

# Yes, yes, tickets did get brought into the sprint
While our sprints were structured, we allowed some flexibility to address unforeseen issues, especially since our product was live in production. Occasionally, urgent problems needed immediate attention,
overshadowing the planned sprint tasks. We also had to ensure that we had some wiggle room if a ticket took a bit longer than expected. 

We also maintained a backlog of bugs and smaller tasks that team members could tackle during the sprint, with decisions on task allocation made by the development team, not the project manager or designers.

## The Key Takeaway
It's important to remember that the people you work with are human. They need to feel productive and see a clear end to their tasks, even if in reality the tasks completed don't mean the work is completely done.
It’s crucial to manage workloads thoughtfully to maintain team morale and effectiveness.

## Got Thoughts? Questions?

We're all ears and would love to hear from you. Feel free to reach out on Twitter or X.

[Yaz Jallad @ninjaparade](https://twitter.com/ninjaparade)

[Mirza Učanbarlić @supersonicbyte](https://twitter.com/supersonicbyte)

[Ahmet Faruk Çuha @faruk\_\_cuha](https://twitter.com/faruk__cuha)
